---
source_url: https://2b2t.place/1million
ingested: 2026-07-15
type: hn_article
hn_id: 48872401
hn_score: 68
hn_author: _____k
---

# The largest available Minecraft world, totalling 15 TB

**Score:** 68 | **By:** _____k | **Comments:** 15
**URL:** https://2b2t.place/1million
**HN:** https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=48872401

## Content

1M² WDL - 2b2t.place The 1,024,000² 2b2t World Download Project (1M²). And More. It ' s finally here. The largest available Minecraft world, totalling 15 TB ( 13.7 TiB ) of highly compressed world data of the Minecraft server 2b2t, which includes the following : a 1,024,000² (1M²) area of the Overworld (Dec 25 2025 - Apr 13 2026), a 512,000² (512k²) area of the Overworld (Nov 11 2024 - Dec 12 2024), a 256,000² (256k²) area of the End (Jan 23 2026 - Feb 15 2026), a 100,000² (100k²) area of the Nether (Jun 9 2025 - Jun 14 2025) TLDR : A group of autists preserve their favorite Minecraft server to a sidelength of 1 million blocks in a large public archive for anyone to download, using 28 bot accounts that fly around the map, storing all world data sent by the server locally. Torrent and Info : https://2b2t.place/1million YouTube Video : https://youtu.be/HDyze1YlOrI GitHub : https://github.com/2b2tplace Discord : https://discord.2b2t.place Patreon : https://patreon.com/2b2tplace Stripe : https://donate.2b2t.place Reddit Post (r/2b2t_Uncensored) : https://www.reddit.com/r/2b2t_Uncensored/comments/1utjkik Reddit Post (r/DataHoarder) : https://www.reddit.com/r/DataHoarder/comments/1uto9h2 This wasn ' t easy to accomplish in the slightest, and took over a year of constant development and stress testing. With severe weaponized autism, the help of several people involved, thousands of dollars spent, and countless hours wasted, we present you the largest world download project ever, on 2b2t, and in Minecraft. Let ' s break down what exactly happened. Watch the SalC1 video about the topic here or timelapse videos of our bots downloading this area on our YouTube channel. This has been brought to you by crayne ( me ) , Fuch, mahan, Steve3, and many more. Created by the 2b2t.place Team If you are interested in world downloads, you can join the 2b2t.place Discord , which is our extension project dedicated to archiving as much of 2b2t as possible before it turns into a boring, censored SMP, or if it shuts down. You can support the project by beta testing, helping the moderation team, providing data, making cool software, or simply being part of the community. More large-scale world downloads are yet to come, and they will be posted in our Discord server. Data-mining also isn ' t ever complete, and we are open to your ideas to search the data for even more interesting things. You can also support the 2b2t.place project by donating via our Patreon . Your donation helps the 2b2t.place project keep up with ongoing server costs, enabling us to provide large-scale data archival to the public. You may choose any of our Tiers, but you will receive the same benefits regardless of your donation amount. Alternatively, you can directly donate a specific sum via our Stripe . 2b2t.place is an independent and unofficial community-maintained project and is not affiliated with, or endorsed by 2b2t, Mojang or Microsoft. Overview TLDR of what went down (See the full story in STORY.md ) Download and setting it up locally See it for yourself (Visit the Minecraft server ( wayback.2b2t.place ) or 2D Map website ) Clarifications Credits Notice TLDR of what went down Context " 2b2t " ( 2builders2tools, or 2b2t.org ) is a multiplayer vanilla survival Minecraft server ( Java Edition ) founded in December 2010 that is always online and historically had no rules, no map resets, and little modifications to vanilla Minecraft. With no rules ( anarchy ) , the server constantly sees players using hacks and exploits to gain an advantage over others. With no map resets, players all around the world have connected to this server and accumulated over a decade of digital history in a single Minecraft world, with the map now measuring 80 TB according to the official 2b2t website. Many other Minecraft servers reset their map occasionally to restart from a blank state and ' clean up ' the mess created by the players and all builds, changes to terrain, progress is erased in doing so. On 2b2t, the map has not, and will never, reset. Combine this with the aspect of having no rules and you get a post-apocalyptic hell that looks like 2b2t. Given how interesting this premise is, the server constantly sees hundreds of players online, and many more hundreds of players sitting in a queue, with the option to pay $ 20 monthly to skip that queue instantly ( priority queue ) , which is how the server funds itself. This server has been the oldest Minecraft server with a promise of complete freedom and to keep running on the same map forever. Downfall That promise has already been broken. In 2023, the server updated to the latest Minecraft version, which was highly anticipated by all players as the server has been stuck on Minecraft version 1.12.2 for a very long time, jumping to 1.19 in a single update. As soon as it updated, it also brought along some changes : A " soft item economy reset " which deleted and limited a long list of items in all inventories, " bad items " that we
